Preface to Edition, 1904.


For the present edition the available material of the last eighteen years
has been consulted, but the plans of battle are similar to two of those of
my book of 1886. They were then the first series of diagrammatic
representations of the fight published, but in no case has this been
acknowledged in the many plans of like kind subsequently published. Some
new facts and inferences the author hopes may increase the value of the
account.

The letters of Captain Nathaniel Fiennes and Captain Kightley, now added,
may serve to make the tale a more living one. They are reproduced, by the
kind courtesy of the authorities of the Radcliffe Library, Oxford, and the
Birmingham Reference Library.

New pages of Notes on Banbury, and an extended bibliography are also
given.

EDWIN A. WALFORD.

_Banbury,

March, 1904._




Preface to First Edition.


In the following pages an endeavour has been made to give a concise
account of the physical features of the Edge Hill district, as well as to
describe the events of the first great battle of the Civil War, with which
it is so intimately associated. The intention is to provide a handbook for
the guidance of the visitor rather than to attempt any elaborate
historical or scientific work. Though Nugent's "Memorials of John Hampden"
has supplied the basis of the information, Clarendon's "History of the
Great Rebellion," the various pamphlets of the time, and Beesley's
"History of Banbury," have also been freely used. In order to avoid
burdening the pages with foot notes, a catalogue of works upon the subject
is printed as an appendix, and the letters and numbers throughout the text
refer thereto. The catalogue, it is hoped, may be of use to the future
student. The plans of the battle, based upon Nugent's account, must be
looked upon as merely diagrammatic, the scale being unavoidably distorted
for the purpose of showing the conjectured positions of the troops. In the
plans it may be worth note that the troops then known as "dragooners" are
classed with the infantry.

The "Notes on Banbury and Thereabouts" are in part reproduced from a small
pamphlet published in 1879. Much of the detail relating to the older
buildings has been derived from Skelton's "Antiquities of Oxfordshire" and
Parker's descriptions in Beesley's History.

To Mr. W. L. Whitehorn my thanks are due for aid in the revision of "Edge
Hill," and in the compilation of the "Notes."

EDWIN A. WALFORD.

_Banbury,

July 7th, 1886._




EDGE HILL: THE BATTLE AND BATTLEFIELD.


I.

To Edge Hill from Banbury a good road trends gradually up hill nearly the
whole way. It rises from the 300 foot level of the Cherwell Vale to 720 at
the highest ground of the ridge of the hill. At a distance of eight miles
to the North-West is the edge or escarpment of high ground bounded on the
East side by the vale of a tributary of the Cherwell, and on the North and
West by the plain drained by the tributaries of the Avon. From Warmington,
six miles from Banbury, North-Westwards to the point marked on the
Ordnance Map as Knowle End, and thence South-Westwards to the Sun Rising,
once the site of a hostelry on the Banbury and Stratford-on-Avon coach
road, the edge makes a right angle with the apex at Knowle End. The
nearest point of the hill range is at Warmington, where a fine fourteenth
century Church stands high above the rock of the roadway. There is the
first record of the battle--a simple headstone to the right of the path to
the South porch telling how one Captain Alexander Gourdin had died on
October 24th, 1642, the day after the fight. From the church-yard long
flights of steps lead to the roadway and village below, where the house
tops show through the foliage of the apple orchards in which they are
partly hidden. Across the vale, three miles to the North, is the range of
the Burton Dassett Hills, an outlier of the Edge Hill range. The Windmill
Hill, the most distant, bears the Beacon House; the square tower of Burton
Dassett Church may be seen amongst the elms on the lower slopes of Church
Hill; Bitham Hill appears in the foreground of the range with the pretty
spire and village of Avon Dassett close at hand.

Westward of Warmington Church runs Camp Lane. It winds along the ridge,
and commands wide views of the plain lands. A beautiful field path springs
from the South side of the lane leading through the village of Ratley to
the Round House and Ratley Grange. Facing Southwards, one looks upon an
equally pleasant though more circumscribed view--the vale of Hornton. The
Arlescot Woods clothe the Northern slopes, and the Manor House rests
amongst the fine trees below. The terraced fields of Adsum Hollow are
three miles down vale Southward, and Nadbury Camp, supposedly a
Romano-british remain, is but a remnant of similar _natural_ terracing on
the South side of the Camp Lane above Arlescot.

At Knowle End, where the road to Kineton plunges steeply down hill, is the
first point of the battle ground and the commencement, strictly speaking,
of Edge Hill. A short distance down the Kineton Road, a pathway on the
right leads under overspreading beech and oak trees for some distance
along the crest of the Knoll, whence a good side view of the hill may be
got. The gate on the opposite side of the Kineton Road opens to a path
through the Radway Woods, and from it, where the foliage is less dense a
prospect opens of many wide leagues of fair midland country--a veritable
patchwork of field and hedgerow. The furze below covers in part Bullet
Hill, the last stand of the Royalists on the battle ground. The road from
Kineton as well as the footway through the woods leads to Edge Hill Tower,
or Round House. Covering the steep hill sides are beech, elm, chestnut
and lime trees of exceptionally fine growth and a wealth of common wild
flowers. The Tower or Round House is an inn, which, with a
_modern-antique_ ruin, makes as it were a landscape gardening adjunct to
Radway Grange lying in the park below. From its upper room is obtained a
fine view of the country. It is an octagonal tower, and was erected with
artificial ruins in 1750 to mark the spot where the King's Standard was
displayed before the Royalist army descended into the plain to give
battle. The village of Radway rests amongst the elms near the foot of the
hill, the church spire being one of the prominent objects of the
foreground. Kineton lies about four miles directly to the North, beyond
which Warwick Castle may be sometimes descried, or the yet more distant
spires of Coventry. Some distance from the Burton hills the smoke of the
Harbury lime works drifts across the landscape. The farms Battledon and
Thistledon, about midway between Radway and Kineton, marked by the
coppices which almost hide the homesteads, are noted from the fact of so
much of the fight having revolved round them.

The footway to the Sun Rising, 1-1/2 miles S.W. of the Round House,
follows the hill side, and though still pleasantly wooded, soon gets
clear of that heavy growth of foliage which has hitherto shut out so much
of the view. The eye ranges over the flat Warwickshire plain in front, to
the hills of Gloucestershire and Worcestershire on the West and the
North-West. The North-Eastern outliers of the Cotteswolds, the hills of
Ebrington and Ilmington, are the nearest in prominence Westwards, beyond
which a clear day will allow even the distant slopes of the Malverns to be
seen. The Bromsgrove, Clent and Clee hills fringe the North-West horizon,
and sometimes the Wrekin is said to appear "like a thin cloud" far away.

At the point where the pathway enters the Stratford-on-Avon road stands
Edge Hill House (the Sun Rising) wherein years ago were some curious
relics of the fight: breast-plates, swords, matchlocks, and a sword
supposed on the evidence of emblems in its decoration to have belonged to
the Earl Lindsay, who commanded the royalists forces prior to the battle,
and who received his death wound in the fight.

In a fir coppice about 200 or 300 yards to the South of the house, the
figure of a red horse roughly cut in the turf of the hill side might
formerly be seen. Dugdale[h] gives the following account of it: "Within
the Precinct of that Manour in Tysoe, now belonging to the E. of
Northampton (but antiently to the Family of Stafford, as I have shewed)
there is cut upon the side of Edg-Hill the Proportion of a Horse, in a
very large Forme; which by Reason of the ruddy Colour of the Earth, is
called THE RED HORSE, and gives Denomination to that fruitfull and
pleasant Countrey thereabouts, commonly called The Vale of Red Horse. The
Trenches of which Ground, where the Shape of the said Horse is so cut out,
being yearly scoured by a Freeholder in this Lordship, who holds certain
Lands there by that service." There is a tradition quoted by Beesley[b] of
its having been cut to commemorate the slaughter of a chieftain's horse at
the battle of Towton, in 1461, the chieftain preferring to share the
perils of the fight with his followers.


II.

The reign of King Charles I. showed a widening of the difference between
the ecclesiastic and puritan elements of the English community--elements
which were the centres of the subsequently enlarged sections, royalist and
parliamentarian. In the later dissentions between the King and the Commons
it was early apparent how widespread had been the alienation of the
people from the King's cause--an alienation heightened, as Green in his
"Short History" tells us, by a fear that the spirit of Roman Catholicism,
so victorious on the continent, should once more become dominant in
England. How great was the tension may be known from the fact of the
contemplated emigration to the American colonies of such leaders as Lord
Saye and Sele, Lord Warwick, Lord Brooke, and Sir John Hampden and Oliver
Cromwell. When the rupture at last came, the Parliament was found to have
secured the larger arsenals, and also to have forces at its disposal in
the trained bands of London and in the militia, which it was enabled
rapidly to enrol. Though the unfurling of the Royal Standard near
Nottingham failed to secure many adherents to the King's cause, Essex
hesitated to attack the royalists when they might have been easily
dispersed, thinking no doubt to overawe the King by mere show of force.
Yet when Charles began recruiting in the neighbourhood of Shrewsbury, he
was soon able to gather an army, and on October 12th, 1642, he commenced
his march upon London. The astute and carefully moderate policy of the
Commons was to rescue the King from his surroundings, and to destroy the
enemies, especially the foreign enemies, of the State, about the King's
person. The sanctity of the King's person was yet a prominent factor--the
belief in divinity of Kingship, notwithstanding all the misrule there had
been, was yet alive in the hearts of the people. Therefore when the King
had gathered his forces together and began his Southward march, Lord Essex
with his army was commissioned "to march against his Majesties Army and
fight with them, and to rescue the persons of the King, Prince and Duke of
York." The Earl of Essex, with the Parliamentarian forces, was at that
time in Worcestershire, endeavouring to prevent the recruiting of the
King's troops; and though the Earl moved two days later on by rapid
marches into Warwickshire, it was only to find that he had been
out-marched by the King, who, after resting at Southam, stood with the
Royalist army at Edgcot across the way to the capital. That this had been
accomplished, notwithstanding the opposition of the strongholds of Warwick
and Coventry, speaks not unfavourably for the generalship of Earl Lindsay,
the King's Lieutenant-General, whom we find at Edgcot contemplating an
attack upon Banbury Castle. The King's was a good position: it commanded
all the roads to London, held Banbury in its hand, covered the Cherwell
bridge and fords, and had within touch the dominating escarpment of Edge
Hill. If the purpose was the subjection of some prominent leaders of the
Parliamentarians it succeeded only in the taking of Lord Saye and Sele's
house at Broughton, and of Banbury, and Banbury Castle; in the partial
destruction of Lord Spencer's house[B] at Wormleighton, and in sending a
summons to Warwick Castle[P] to surrender.

Kineton, on October 22nd, was the headquarters of the Parliamentary army,
the troops in the evening disposing themselves on the surrounding plain.
"The common soldiers have not come into a bed, but lain in the open field
in the wet and cold nights," says the Worthy Divine[PG] "and most of them
scarcely eat or drank at all for 24 hours together, nay, for 48, except
fresh water when they could get it." The want of transport, which had
necessitated Hampden and Hollis struggling behind a day's march in the
rear in the neighbourhood of Stratford-on-Avon, had no doubt entailed
these privations upon the army. Nor do the Royalists appear to have fared
better, for Clarendon[B381] complains of the hostility of the country
people, stating also that the circuit in which the battle was fought,
being between the dominions of Lord Saye and Lord Brooke, was the most
eminently corrupt of any in the kingdom. The King's forces seem to have
been quartered about the country between Wormleighton and Cropredy, Prince
Rupert with his cavalry near Wormleighton, the King himself staying at
Edgcot House, whilst the main body of the army occupied the slopes and
high lands on the Northamptonshire side of the Cherwell vale near by. Thus
the three roads North of Banbury were dominated by the Royalist troops,
and the fourth, the old London road, was within striking distance.

The preaching of the local divines, Robert Harris, John Dod, and Robert
Cleaver, had no doubt added largely to the enthusiasm of the country folk
for the cause of the Commons. Though no great increase of the King's
forces could be expected in such a district, yet there is an interesting
account in Kimber and Johnson's Baronetage[NO] (1771) of a country
gentleman Mr. (afterwards Sir Richard) Shuckburgh:

"Sir Richard Shuckburgh, Knt., eldest son and heir, was in no way inferior
to his ancestors. As King Charles I. marched to Edgecot, near Banbury, on
October 22nd, 1642, he saw him hunting in the fields with a very good pack
of hounds, upon which it is reported that he fetched a deep sigh, and
asked who the gentleman was that hunted so merrily that morning when he
was going to fight for his crown and dignity; and being told that it was
this Richard Shuckburgh, he was graciously ordered to be called to him,
and was by him very graciously received. Upon which he went immediately
home, armed all his tenants, and the next day attended him in the field,
where he was knighted, and was present at the battle of Edge Hill. After
the taking of Banbury Castle, and his Majesty's retreat from those parts,
he went to his own seat and fortified himself on the top of Shuckborough
Hill, where, being attacked by some of the Parliament forces, he defended
himself till he fell, with most of his tenants about him; but being taken
up and life perceived in him, he was carried away prisoner to Kenilworth
Castle, where he lay a considerable time, and was forced to purchase his
liberty at a dear rate."

A fight for the possession of Lord Spencer's house at Wormleighton was the
Saturday evening's prelude to the Sunday's battle. It had been garrisoned
by some Parliamentarian troops sent by Essex, and in Rupert's attack some
prisoners were taken, from whom, it is said, the whereabouts of the
Parliamentarian army was learned.[Y] The house is said to have been
partly burned down in the fight, but it is not clear whether it happened
then or in the year 1643. Though with the Parliamentarians in the early
part of the Rebellion, Lord Spencer became Royalist long ere the campaigns
were over. The fact of an outpost being pushed so far as Wormleighton
shows that the Dassett Hills were held by the Parliament forces. The
Royalists had marched into the heart of a hostile country, Warwick Castle
and Lord Brooke on the N.W., Fawsley House and the Knightleys on the N.E.,
and on the South, Sir A. Cope and Hanwell Castle, and Banbury and
Broughton Castle. Lord Northampton's lands on the Western border of
Oxfordshire were near enough to find touch with the King. His house played
locally a most prominent part for the Royalist cause, and its military
leadership was of the best.
